When should audience engagement begin in a film? Graphic and title designer Saul Bass would argue that _“The audience involvement with a film should really begin with the first frame”_. It was this belief which would lead Bass to become a pioneer of film, and define the industry standard of how a title sequence should be approached. Before Bass, the importance of a title sequence was not seen as a priority to the engagement of the cinema audience. It was common that film titles would be projected onto the theatre curtain that covered the screen. These titles were nothing more than still frames which served the most basic purpose of letting the audience know what the film was called. Many audience members would use this time to buy food and use the restroom. These original title cards were a far cry from the foundations that Bass would implement and future generations of filmmakers would build upon. This essay seeks to explore how Bass’s influence changed and improved the movie goers experience. An aspect that is just as important today as it was then. By analysing title sequences both before and after Bass as well as media heavily influenced by his work.

Saul Bass began his career in hollywood in the 1940’s, originally, as a graphic designer creating movie posters and marketing material. This role would eventually lead Bass to meet **Otto Preminger**, a director with whom Bass would work on multiple projects. The first film to see the Preminger/Bass partnership was the 1954 film ‘Carmen Jones’. Bass designed the marketing material for the film which impressed preminger so much, that he further commissioned Bass to design the title sequence. This partnership proved so successful Bass was brought on board for Premingers next project, ‘[the man with the golden arm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sS76whmt5Yc)’. The poster for the film received widespread acclaim for its simplicity, and its effectiveness in portraying the theme of the film. However, a greater achievement would be reached. During the process of designing the poster, Bass and Preminger both came to an agreed opinion on the design, with Bass asking “Why not make it move”. The simple notion to add movement to the title would lead Bass to develop a break through in film design that begged the question “why shouldn't the title be as important as the film”? Bass would go on to work with several influential directors such as Martin Scorsese, Alfred Hitchcock and Stanley kubrick to name a few. While the title sequence for ‘the man with the golden arm’ received world wide acclaim.

Bass saw the title sequence as an effective way to ease the audience into the themes and tones that would be explored within the film. He achieved this using many different mediums, including animation and footage.  This creative freedom allowed Bass to create distinct and unique title sequences for each film. The simplistic style employed by Bass through his title sequences and movie posters allowed the message of the film to be portrayed in a straightforward manner. Almost, in essence making them feel like a short film in their own right. For example, the title sequence for the 1963 film ‘[mad mad mad world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1A7bJD3atk)’ shows a globe with various chaotic visual gags happening in rapid succession. This gives the audience a glimpse of the madness and chaos that ensues when multiple parties try to find a buried treasure in a short span of time. In his own words, Bass said of the sequence “Take a globe of the world and see just how many visual jokes you can squeeze out of it”. This title sequence perfectly fit the feel of the film and that was Bass’s greatest skill; an ability to understand and portray the theme within the first 3 minutes. In a way, Bass saw the title sequence as an advertisement for the film that was to come. He understood that it was important to grip the audience and completely engage them within the first few minutes.    

For Bass, the content of a title sequence was an important aspect, but timing and placement also became key. The 1966 film ‘[grand prix](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5RILdsjeL_4&t=78s)’ uses its title sequence to show the preparation of sports cars in the final moments before the first race of the film begins. Bass also uses the sound of revving engines as his score for this sequence. This helps to get the audience ready and fully engaged. It also helps the film to flow organically by having the title sequence take place right before the events of the film begin. This gave Bass the opportunity to convey important information to the audience such as location and period. However, this was a different case for the 1961 film ‘[West side story](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C36llSobVHc)’. West side story ends on an emotional note and Bass felt the audience needed time to gather themselves and reflect on the final moments of the film. Leaving the title sequence until the end, gave Bass the opportunity to create a “decompression chamber” of sorts that he felt the audience would appreciate. These two examples show the importance of title placement, by either giving the viewer an insight into what they are about to see, or allowing them time to reflect. Bass understood film as much as he understood the sequences he was creating. He kept the films structure in mind when creating his work, making sure they felt like they were part of the same project. He showed a passion for not just titles, imagery or iconography, but for filmmaking itself. 

A great example of how Bass was able to understand and portray a films themes and tones can be found in the 1966 film ‘[Seconds](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDgIGRuLdPk)’. The film follows a banker and the events that follow when he discovers that his friend, who he thought had died was actually faking his death with help from a mysterious company. The protagonist decides to undergo the procedure himself and is given a completely new identity. The main theme of the film is that of identity and Bass knew exactly how to approach this. Using footage of an actor's face, he distorted it and only every showed sections of the face, never revealing a full image of the face. This idea of taking something familiar, something that every member of the audience could relate to, and making it an uncomfortable image suit the films theme and overall tone perfectly.
You can easily see the effect that Saul bass would have on the film industry and subsequently, television. The number of title sequences that are directly inspired by Bass and his style are staggering to say the least. TV shows like ‘[Mad Men](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJ5-sdHP0YQ)’ and ‘[Feud: bette and joan](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIlaOajamlk)’ have distinct styles that would make the audience think that Bass himself had either had some input or created them himself. One of the best examples of this, is the title sequence for the 2017 series ‘feud’. The sequence perfectly embodied everything Bass believed in when it came to creating an engaging title sequence. The use of music, colour and overall style gives the audience a real sense of the themes that the series would will explore and even gave a sense of the time in which the series is set. These first moments are even more important for television than film since audiences have to invest more time in completing a television series than a film. 

In a way, Bass didn't look at each sequence he created as the beginning or end of a film. Instead, he pictured them as the film itself. An extension of the film. A compilation of hundreds of man hours poured into creating the crucial first frames that the audience would see. He understood that when the film begins to roll, the audiences engagement should roll along with it. He set the standards for how you introduce the tone, themes and message of a film before the audience has even met a character. Bass saw each sequence as its own individual work of art that in some cases could become more iconic than the film itself. Any film can have amazing sound design, editing or choreography but for a film to showcase all these things in its opening moments helps to entice the audience for what they're about to see and because of Bass’ dedication to his art, film and television are all the better for it. Bass understood film as much as he understood the sequences he was creating. He kept the films structure in mind when creating his work, making sure they felt like they were part of the same project. He showed a passion for not just titles, imagery or iconography, but for filmmaking itself. Today we as an audience are enjoying the benefits of saul Bass’ vision.  The art of the title sequence is just as important as the film itself.  A good title sequence explains a film, and allows the viewer an insight into what they are committing themselves to. A great title sequence does this with style.
